# Coursera Getting and Cleaning Data

## Introduction

This repository holds my submission for the Coursera "Getting and
Cleaning Data" course project.

## The raw data

This project processes raw data from a dataset generated from test
subjects carrying Samsung mobile phones which recorded data using its
internal accelerometers and gyroscopes, whilst the subjects performed various
activities. The Data and further explanation can be found
[here](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones)

## Project Files

The project includes:

-   `README.md` - This file, which explains the files in this project, and
    describes the processing carried out by the `run_analysis.R` script
-   `run_analysis.R` - A processing script written in R which downloads
    and processes the data gathered
*   `codebook.md` - A codebook which describes the data generated by the
    `run_analysis.R` script

## Processing the data with `run_analysis.R`

The `run_analysis.R` script performs the following activities:

1. If necessary,a `data` subdirectory, is created with the following layout:

~~~
  .
    - data
        - raw
        - processing
        - tidy
~~~

2. If the raw data zip file does not exist it is downloaded the raw data zip file is downloaded into the `./data/raw` directory and
unzipped.

3. The script then merges the test and train datasets from the raw data,
   creating 3 `data.tables` . One a vector of the subject, one containing the
   vectors of the measured and calculated values from the raw data, and the
   last identifying the activity being performed at each point.

4. The feature names for the measured and calculated data are also loaded to
   provide descriptive measurement names

5. The script then extracts only the calculated mean and standard deviation of
   each of the features, these are identified by the use of "mean()", and
   "std()" in the feature name.

6. The `data.table` columns are then named with the feature vector names.

7. The script then reads the descriptive activity names from a file provided
   by the dataset (`activity_labels.txt`), which are then used to create a
   descriptive vector of activities which are added to the dataset as a new
   column together with the subject who is performing the activity.

8. This dataset is then tidied by gathering the feature vector column headings
   into a factor column, which creates a `variable` and a `value` column.

9. This tidy data is summarized by calculating the mean of all readings for each variable grouped by subject and activity.

10. This tidy dataset is then written out to the file `./data/tidy/summary.txt`


